The Whirlpool Galaxy is a well studied grand design galaxy with two major spiral arms, and a large satellite NGC 5195. The arms both show long uniform sections with perturbations ("kinks" or sharp turns) in specific regions. Comparing the two arms shows a small radial offset between the main kinked regions. We analysed the morphology and also the velocity field in the disk of M51 using kinematic maps based on Hα and CO line emission. These sample complementary radial ranges, with the CO map covering the central zone and the Hα map extending to cover the outer zone. We looked for indicators of density wave resonance, zones where radial flows of gas in the disk plane reverse their sign. These were present in both velocity maps; their two-dimensional localization placed them along or closely parallel to the spiral arms, at a set of well defined galactocentric radii, and notably more concentrated along the southern, stronger arm. The results can be well interpreted quantitatively, using a numerical model of the interaction of M51 and NGC5195 in which the satellite has made two relatively recent passes through the disk plane of M51. During the first pass the pair of dominant spiral arms was stimulated, and during the second pass the strong kinks in both arms were formed at about the same time. The second interaction is particularly well characterised, because the timescale corresponding to the production of the kinks and the recovery of the original pitch angle is identical for the two arms.
Coronal lines (CLs), which arise from collisionally excited forbidden transitions from highly ionized species, are a powerful diagnostic tool in uncovering active galactic nuclei (AGNs) and constraining their properties. However, recent optical surveys are finding that coronal lines are rarely detected in the majority of local AGNs, possibly as a result of the depletion of elements from the interstellar gas onto dust grains. Prominent CL emission may therefore only arise when dust is being destroyed in the highly ionized gas in AGNs. To explore the possibility that dust destruction may be caused by ionized gas outflows in galaxies with prominent CLs, we present the first large-scale systematic study of ionized outflows, as traced by the [O III] λ5007 emission, in galaxies displaying CL emission relative to a robust control sample of non-CL-emitting galaxies. We find: 1) galaxies that display CL emission have a significantly elevated outflow incidence rate compared to their matched controls, 2) the outflow luminosity is significantly higher in the CL-emitters, 3) the CL-emitters have systematically lower intrinsic extinction toward the ionized gas compared with the controls, 4) there are significant correlations between the CL luminosity and outflow velocity for the iron CLs, with similar relationships found between the CL FWHM and outflow luminosity. These observations are consistent with dust destruction in an outflowing wind from a dusty torus causing efficient CL emission.
Dense gas in molecular clouds is an important signature of ongoing and future star formation. We identify and track dense cores in the starforge simulations, following the core evolution from birth through dispersal by stellar feedback for typical Milky Way cloud conditions. Only ∼8% of cores host protostars, and most disperse before forming stars. The median starless and protostellar core lifetimes are ∼ 0.5-0.6 Myr and ∼ 0.8-1.1 Myr, respectively, where the protostellar phase lasts ∼ 0.1 +0.1 -0.05 Myr. While core evolution is stochastic, we find that virial ratios and linewidths decline in prestellar cores, coincident with turbulent decay. Collapse occurs over ∼ 0.1 Myr, once the central density exceeds ≳ 10 6 cm -3 . Starless cores, only, follow linewidth-size and mass-size relations, σ ∝ R 0.3 and M ∝ R 1 . The core median mass, radius, and velocity dispersion scale weakly with the cloud magnetic field strength. We cluster the core properties and find that protostellar cores have > 80% likelihood of belonging to three particular groups that are characterized by high central densities, compact radii, and lower virial parameters. Overall, core evolution appears to be universally set by the interplay of gravity and magnetized turbulence, while stellar feedback dictates protostellar core properties and sets the protostellar phase lifetime.
Context. With the rise of large surveys across wavelengths, both supervised and unsupervised machine learning algorithms have increasingly aided in detecting large samples of old open clusters in high-extinction regions of the Milky Way bulge and disk. Aims. Our primary goal is to confirm or discard automatically detected open clusters from poorly studied, heavily contaminated regions of the Milky Way. Cleaning these samples is critical for reconstructing the Galactic disk's star formation history and understanding the thin and thick disk formation model. Methods. We used data from the VISTA Variables in the Via Láctea extended Survey (VVVX), Two Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS), and Gaia Data Release 3 (Gaia DR3) to confirm and characterize nine open cluster candidates: BH118, BH 144, Schuster-MWSC 1756, Saurer 3, FSR 1521, Saurer 2, Haffner 10-FSR 1231, Juchert 12, and Pismis 3. We constructed density maps and vector-proper motion diagrams to analyse the targets. Additionally, we performed photometric analysis to derive their main physical parameters. Results. We examined cluster images in 2MASS, Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE), and Dark Energy Camera Plane Survey (DECaPS), identifying star clusters through an over-density of stars. This was confirmed with a VVVX photometry density map and validated using Gaussian Kernel Density Estimation. Using Gaia proper motion data, we refined cluster memberships and decontaminated the data to build the final cluster catalogue with high-likely star cluster members. We derived the following parameters: extinction values ranging from A K s =0.07±0.03 to 0.50±0.04 ; colour excess values from E(J-K s )= 0.16±0.03 to 0.60±0.03 ; distances from D = 2.19±0.06 kpc to 8.94±0.06 kpc; Galactocentric distances from R G = 7.82 kpc to 15.08 kpc; vertical distance component values from Z = -0.09 kpc to 0.34 kpc; and tangential velocities from V T = 30.59 km/s to 245.42 km/s. We also computed age and metallicity by fitting Parsec isochrones, finding ages ranging from t= 20 Myr to 5 Gyr and metallicity from [Fe/H] = -0.5 to 0.5. Structural parameters include core radii from r c = 0.71' to 5.21', tidal radii from r t = 3.4' to 12.0', and concentration indices from c = 0.36 to 0.83. Conclusions. we photometrically confirmed the open cluster nature for 9 targets in our compilation, updating their main physical parameters.
Double-peaked narrow emission lines (DPNELs) might be evidence for the existence of kpc-scale dual AGNs. There are so far large samples of objects with DPNELs in narrow emission line galaxies. Here, a systematic search is made to build a sample of type 1 AGNs with double-peaked [O ] from Data Release 16 of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). Through visually inspecting and fitting [O ] , fitting broad H emission lines, performing F-test for [O ] profiles, and checking broad H and [O ] emission lines, we select 62 type 1 AGNs with reliable double-peaked [O ] from 11557 QSOs with z < 0.3. After visually checking the 62 SDSS multi-color images, we find only seven objects with signs of merging. Four possible models for the double-peaked [O ] observed in our sample are discussed: the superposition model, AGN outflow model, dual AGN model, and rotating disk model. However, the current results can not provide any one explanation conclusively, and additional observational data are needed to provide the details of narrow line regions. But at least 22 objects with different velocity offsets between double-peaked [O ] and narrow H emission lines could be excluded as dual AGN candidates. The relative velocity offsets of the [O ] blue-shifted/red-shifted components are negative to their line flux ratios, which is consistent with dual AGN model. This work provides a new sample of 62 type 1 AGNs with double-peaked [O ] for further study.
Context. The mass function (MF) of young (age ≲ 200 Myr) stellar clumps is an indicator of the mechanism driving the collapse of the interstellar medium (ISM) into the giant molecular clouds. Typically, the MF of clumps in main-sequence galaxies is described by a power law (dN/dM * ∝ M -α * ) with slope α = 2, hinting that the collapse is driven by turbulence. Aims. To understand whether the local environment affects star formation, we have modelled the clump MF of six cluster galaxies, from the GASP survey, undergoing strong ram-pressure stripping. This phenomenon, exerted by the hot and high-pressure intra-cluster medium (ICM), has produced long tails of stripped ISM, where clumps form far away from the galactic disk and are surrounded by the ICM itself. Methods. Clumps were selected from HST-UVIS/WFC3 images, covering from near-UV to red-optical bands and including Hα emission-line maps. The catalogue comprises 398 Hα clumps (188 in tails, 210 in disk outskirts, the so-called extraplanar region) and 1270 UV clumps (593 tail, 677 extraplanar). Using mock images, we quantified the mass completeness and bias of our sample. Keeping these two effects into account, we adopted a Bayesian approach to fit the clump mass catalogue to a suitable MF. Results. The resulting MFs are steeper than the expected value 2. In the tails, the Hα clumps have slope α = 2.31 ± 0.12, while the UV slope is larger (2.60 ± 0.09), in agreement with ageing effects. Similar results are found in the extraplanar region, with Hα slope α = 2.45 +0.20  -0.16 and UV slope α = 2.63 +0.20 -0.18 , even though in this case they are consistent within uncertainties. Conclusions. We suggest that the steepening results from the higher-than-usual turbulent environment, arising from the interaction between the ISM and the ICM. As shown by recent works, this process can favour the fragmentation of the largest ISM clouds, inhibiting the formation of very massive clumps.
Precise tracking of the growth in galaxy size and the evolution of merger fractions with redshift is vital for understanding the formation history of submillimeter galaxies (SMGs). This study investigates these evolutions over a broad redshift range (1 < z ≲ 6), using a sample of 222 SMGs with a median redshift of z = 2.61 +0.89  -0.82 identified by ALMA and JCMT, enhanced by the advanced imaging capabilities of the JWST/NIRCam and MIRI. We find significant evolution in effective radii (R e ) in rest-frame V-band (R e ∝ (1 + z) -0.87±0.08 ) and near-infrared (NIR) band (R e ∝ (1 + z) -0.88±0.11 ), with the NIR size evolution resembling that of massive star-forming galaxies at lower redshift. Visual inspections reveal a major merger fraction of 24.3 ± 3.7% and an interaction fraction of up to 48.4 ± 11.1%. The major merger fraction exhibits an increase from 14.7±9.1% at z = 1 to 26.6±8.4% at z = 3, after which it remains approximately constant across the redshift range 3 < z < 6. In contrast, the interaction fraction remains relatively stable across the range 2 < z < 5. Our results indicate that late-stage major mergers are not the primary formation mechanism for SMGs at z < 3, while interactions appear to play a significant role across the broader redshift range of 1 < z < 6. Additionally, HST-based major merger identifications may overestimate the true fraction by a factor of 1.7 at z ∼ 2. These findings highlight the varying roles of mergers and interactions in driving the formation of massive, dusty star-forming galaxies across different redshifts.
The background galaxies in Euclid Early Release Observations (ERO) images of the Perseus cluster make up a remarkable sample in its combination of 0.57 deg 2 area, 25.3 and 23.2 AB mag depth, as well as 0 . ′′ 1 and 0 . ′′ 3 angular resolutions, in optical and near-infrared bands, respectively. Towards characterising the history of the Hubble sequence, we perform a preliminary morphological analysis of 2445 and 12 786 galaxies with I E ≤ 21 and I E ≤ 23, respectively. We use single-Sérsic profiles and the sums of a Sérsic bulge and an exponential disc to model these galaxies with SourceXtractor++ and analyse their positional, structural, and flux parameters in order to assess their consistencies and biases. The fitted galaxies to I E ≤ 21 span the various Hubble types with ubiquitous bulge and disc components, and a bulge-to-total light ratio B/T taking all values from 0 to 1. The median effective radius of the single-Sérsic profile is a biased estimate of galaxy size, intermediate between the bulge and disc effective radii, depending on B/T . The axis ratio of the single-Sérsic profile overestimates that of the disc, increasingly so with B/T . The type of model impacts the photometry with -0.08 to 0.01 mag median systematic I E offsets between single-Sérsic and bulge-disc total magnitudes, and a 0.05 to 0.15 mag dispersion, from low to high B/T . We measure a median 0.4 mag bulge-disc colour difference in I E -J E that originates from the disc-dominated galaxies, whereas bulge-dominated galaxies have similar median colours of their components. Remarkably, we also measure redder-inside disc colour gradients, based on 5 to 10% systematic variations of disc effective radii between the optical and near-infrared bands. This analysis demonstrates the usefulness and limits of single-Sérsic profile modelling, and the power of bulge-disc decomposition for reliably characterising the morphology of lenticulars and spirals in Euclid images.
Context. The correlations between star formation rate (SFR), stellar mass (M ⋆ ), and gas-phase metallicity for star-forming (SF) galaxies, known as global scaling relations or fundamental relations, have been studied during the last decades to understand the evolution of galaxies. However the origin of these correlations and their scatter, which may also be related to their morphology or environment, is still a subject of debate. Aims. In this work, we establish fundamental relations, for the first time, in isolated systems in the local universe (with 0.005 ≤ z ≤ 0.080), which can give insight into the underlying physics of star-formation. We use a sample of isolated galaxies to explore whether star formation is regulated by smooth secular processes. In addition, galaxies in physically bound isolated pairs and isolated triplets may also interact with each other, where interaction itself may enhance/regulate star-formation and the distribution of gas and metals within galaxies. Methods. We made use of published emission line fluxes information from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) to identify SF galaxies in the SDSS-based catalogue of isolated galaxies (SIG), isolated pairs (SIP), and isolated triplets (SIT). We also use this data to derive their aperture-corrected SFR (considering two different methods) and oxygen abundance, 12 + log(O/H), using bright lines calibrations. Stellar masses for SIG, SIP, and SIT galaxies were estimated by fitting their spectral energy distribution on the five SDSS bands. Results. The SFR results found using both methods seem to be consistent. We compared our results with a sample of SF galaxies in the SDSS. We found that, on average, at a fixed stellar mass, the SIG SF galaxies have lower SFR values than Main Sequence (MS) SF galaxies in the SDSS and central galaxies in the SIP and SIT. On average, SIG galaxies have higher 12 + log(O/H) values than galaxies in the SIP, SIT, and comparison sample. When distinguishing between central and satellite galaxies in the SIP and SIT, centrals and SIG galaxies present similar values (∼8.55) while satellites have values close to M33 (∼8.4). Using the D n (4000) parameter as a proxy of the age of the stellar populations we found that, on average, SIG and central galaxies have higher D n (4000) values than satellites and comparison galaxies. Conclusions. In general SIG galaxies do not present stellar starbursts produced by interactions with other galaxies and therefore their gas is consumed more slowly and at a regular pace. On the contrary, SIP and SIT galaxies present higher SFR values at fixed mass (both in central and satellite galaxies). Therefore, the effect of adding one or two companion galaxies is noticeable and produce a similar effect as the typical average environment around galaxies in the local universe. The successive interactions between the galaxies that form these pairs and triplets have enhanced the star formation. Based on our results for isolated galaxies, we propose a ground level 'nurture' free SFR-M ⋆ and gas metallicity-SFR-M ⋆ relations for SF galaxies in the local universe.
We present a catalogue of extended radio sources from the SARAO MeerKAT Galactic Plane Survey (SMGPS). Compiled from 56 survey tiles and covering approximately 500 deg 2 across the first, third, and fourth Galactic quadrants, the catalogue includes 16534 extended and diffuse sources with areas larger than 5 synthesised beams. Of them, 3891 (24% of the total) are confidently associated with known Galactic radio-emitting objects in the literature, such as Hii regions, supernova remnants, planetary nebulae, luminous blue variables, and Wolf-Rayet stars. A significant fraction of the remaining sources, 5462 (33%), are candidate extragalactic sources, while 7181 (43%) remain unclassified. Isolated radio filaments are excluded from the catalogue. The diversity of extended sources underscores MeerKAT's contribution to the completeness of censuses of Galactic radio emitters, and its potential for new scientific discoveries. For the catalogued sources, we derived basic positional and morphological parameters, as well as flux density estimates, using standard aperture photometry. This paper describes the methods followed to generate the catalogue from the original SMGPS tiles, detailing the source extraction, characterisation, and crossmatching procedures. Additionally, we analyse the statistical properties of the catalogued populations.